?
>> Narrator: HERE IN NORTHERN
SIBERIA, THE EARTH HAS BEEN
FROZEN THROUGHOUT HUMAN
HISTORY.
IN THE WINTER OF 2008 - 2009,
A GROUP OF SCIENTISTS SET OUT
ON A REMARKABLE EXPEDITION.
TO STUDY THE HISTORY OF THIS
ICE.
THE GERMAN AND RUSSIAN TEAM
HAD BEEN PREPARING FOR YEARS,
HERE IN THE FAR NORTH EAST OF
RUSSIA, CLOSE TO THE DATE
LINE, THEY'RE WANTING TO
DISCOVER WHAT IT WILL MEAN FOR
THE REST OF THE WORLD WHEN THE
ICE MELTS.
?
>> Narrator: EL'GYGYTGYN IS A
POLAR LAKE IN A CRATER FORMED
3.6 MILLION YEARS AGO BY A
HUGE METEORITE.
WHEN THE FIREBALL IMPACTED, IT
MELTED THE ROCKS AND FORMED A
GIANT CRATER WHICH FILLED OVER
MILLIONS OF YEARS WITH WATER,
DUST, AND SEDIMENT.
THESE COULD TELL US MORE ABOUT
THE FORMATION OF THE EARTH.
THEY REVEAL CLIMATE CHANGES,
WHAT PLANTS AND ANIMALS LIVED
HERE, AND HOW THEY REACTED TO
CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE.
THE DATA HERE IS UNDISTORTED.
IT HAS NEVER BEEN COVERED BY
VOLCANIC ASH OR GLACIERS.
?
>> Narrator: THE SCIENTISTS SET
OUT FROM PEVEK, THE NORTHERN
MOST TOWN IN RUSSIA, A PORT ON
THE EAST SIBERIAN SEA.
THE HARBOR IS ONLY FREE OF ICE
FOR A FEW MONTHS A YEAR.
IT'S JUST 2000 KILOMETERS FROM
THE NORTH POLE.
THIS OUTPOST OF CIVILIZATION
HAS A POPULATION OF JUST
OVER 5000.
THE ROADS OUT OF PEVEK END
AFTER JUST A FEW KILOMETERS.
THE TOWN IS VIRTUALLY AN
ISLAND ON THE MAIN LAND.
THE MAIN ACCESS IS BY AIR.
AND THERE'S ONLY ONE PLANE
EVERY TWO WEEKS.
WEATHER PERMITTING.
WINTER HAD JUST SET IN HERE IN
THE ARCTIC CIRCLE.
THE WEATHER WAS UNSETTLED.
THE SCIENTISTS HAD TO WAIT A
WEEK BEFORE THE METEOROLOGICAL
OFFICE GAVE THEM THE GREEN
LIGHT TO PROCEED TO
EL GYGYTGYN , THE WHITE LAKE.
>> Narrator: EVENTUALLY, THEY
BOARDED THEIR TRANSPORT
HELICOPTER AND SET OFF ON THE
TWO HOUR FLIGHTS FROM PEVEK TO
THE CRATER.
THE GERMAN AND RUSSIAN
SCIENTISTS HAD NEVER SEEN
THE LAKE.
ONLY PHOTOS OF IT.
>> OUR RESEARCH WOULD INCLUDE
DRILLING AND SHOULD ADD A LOT
TO THE WORK WE'VE DONE SO FAR.
WE'RE OPENING UP A WHOLE NEW
FIELD, A NEW DIMENSION.
IN THE DEPTH, THE AGE, AND THE
CONSEQUENCES.
>> Narrator: PREPARATIONS FOR
THIS EXPEDITION BEGAN TEN
YEARS PREVIOUSLY.
AND A RUSSIAN DRILLING TEAM
CONSTRUCTED A CONTAINER
SETTLEMENT FOR THE SCIENTISTS
ON THE RIM OF THE CRATER.
WE'RE TRYING TO UNLOAD
EVERYTHING SO THAT THE
HELICOPTER CAN GET AWAY WHILE
IT'S STILL LIGHT.
THEN WE'LL GRADUALLY TAKE
EVERYTHING TO THE CAMP.
THERE ARE ONLY 5 HOURS OF
DAYLIGHT IN WINTER, AND
HELICOPTERS CAN ONLY FLY WHEN
THE WEATHER'S SETTLED AND
VISIBILITY IS GOOD.
FOR WEEKS, THESE SCIENTISTS
AND THEIR RUSSIAN COLLEAGUES
WOULD BE ON THEIR OWN.
>> FIRST, WE'LL GET SET UP
AND ORGANIZE HOW WE'RE
GOING TO LIVE HERE.
AND THEN WE'LL SEE.
IN THE NEXT FEW DAYS, WE HAVE
TO GET CRACKING.
>> Narrator: TWO HUNDRED TONS
OF MACHINES AND EQUIPMENT
WERE BROUGHT HERE FOR
THE RESEARCH WORK.
THE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS
TOOK SIX MONTHS TO ARRIVE FROM
POTTSTOWN IN EASTERN GERMANY.
KADISHA FEDEROV WAS IN CHARGE
OF PROCUREMENT, ORGANIZATION,
SUPPLIES, AND GENERAL
CONDITIONS IN THE CAMP.
>> A SAUNA, FOR US.
AND WHERE WE HAVE A HOUSE
WITH LIGHT ON TOP IT IS
DINNER ROOM.
WE'LL GET SOME FOOD.
WHERE WE HAVE TWO HOUSES.
ONE OF THEM WILL BE FOR IT'S,
A LITTLE BIT LATER WE WILL
MOVE IT TO THE SIDE WHERE
THERE WILL BE A DRILL
RIG AND IT WILL BE FOR
CORE HANDLING FOR US AND
JUST FOR WARM FOR US
JUST TO SURVIVE.
SO CAMP IS MORE OR LESS READY
FOR OUR WORK.
>> Narrator: THE GERMANS PLAN
TO STAY FOR SIX WEEKS AND
DRILL INTO THE PERMAFROST.
THEY SPENT THE FIRST EVENING
GETTING TO KNOW EACH OTHER AND
RESOLVING TECHNICAL ISSUES.
GEORG SCHONBORN WAS ANXIOUS TO
GET STARTED.
>> THERE ARE CHANGING SEA
CURRENTS HERE THAT RESULT IN
REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGES.
THE POLAR CAPS EXPAND AND
CONTRACT.
THE MANTEL OF AIR IN THE
ATMOSPHERE HAS GRADIENTS WHICH
AFFECT THE WEATHER AND THE
CLIMATE IN THE LONG TERM.
BUT PERMAFROST HAS BEEN
LARGELY OVERLOOKED.
WE DON'T KNOW HOW IT REACTS TO
CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE, OR TO
WHAT EXTENT IT'S A BUFFER
FOR CLIMATE CHANGE OR
ACCELERATES IT.
>> Narrator: A QUARTER OF THE
EARTH'S SURFACE IS
PERMANENTLY FROZEN.
THIS ICE GIVES THE EARTH
STABILITY AND BONDS FAST
QUANTITIES OF GAS MOSTLY
METHANE AND CARBON DIOXIDE.
THEY ARE GREENHOUSE GASES AND
NO ONE KNOWS WHAT THE RESULT
WILL BE WHEN THIS ICE
EVENTUALLY MELTS.
IF THE EXPEDITION IS
SUCCESSFUL, IT'LL FIND
EVIDENCE OF A TIME WHEN THE
EARTH WAS MUCH WARMER THAN IT
IS NOW.
?
>> Narrator: 2003 SAW MASSIVE
AVALANCHES IN THE ALPS.
THE PERMAFROST IS MELTING.
WITH THE RESULT THAT
BUILDINGS, POWER LINES, AND
ROADS ARE DESTROYED AS FAR A
FIELD AS SIBERIA, CANADA, AND
THE U.S.
?
>> Narrator: AS THE EARTH'S
ATMOSPHERE WARMS UP,
THE ICE MELTS.
FIRST, ON THE SURFACE THEN
DEEPER AND DEEPER.
SAND AND ROCK HELD TOGETHER BY
THE ICE SLIDE.
THE GROUND BECOMES UNSTABLE.
THE EARTH'S SURFACE CHANGES
SHAPE.
?
>> Narrator: THIS IS THE
TOURIST RESORT GRINDELWALD IN
THE SWISS ALPS.
A MOUNTAINOUS REGION WITH RICH
WATER DEPOSITS IN THE ROCK.
LOCAL RESIDENTS CAN SEE THE
RESULTS OF GLOBAL WARMING WITH
THEIR OWN EYES.
THE GLACIER HAS BEEN VISIBLY
RECEDING FOR YEARS.
BUT NOW, THERE'S A NEW
INVISIBLE THREAT.
THE ICE DEEP WITHIN THE 3000
METER HIGH MOUNTAIN IS
ALSO MELTING.
?
>> Narrator: THIS IS WHERE IN
2006, ONE OF THE LARGEST
LANDSLIDES OCCURRED.
700 TONS OF ROCK CRASHED ONTO
THE GLACIER.
THE ICE INSIDE THE MOUNTAIN
HAD MELTED.
THE VILLAGE OF
GRINDELWALD WAS BURIED.
EVERYONE HERE KNOWS THE
GEOLOGIST HANS RUDOLF KEUSEN
AS "THE DISASTER LOOKOUT."
HE NEEDS A HELICOPTER TO DO
HIS WORK.
KEUSEN FLIES TO MEASURING
POINTS HE HAS SET IN
THE MOUNTAINS.
THEY HELP HIM FORECAST WHERE
THE NEXT DISASTER LOOMS.
KEUSEN HAS BEEN STUDYING
CLIMATE CHANGE FOR YEARS AND
ITS EFFECT ON LANDSLIDES IN
THE ALPS.
HIS ADVICE AND HIS EARLY
WARNING SYSTEM ARE INVALUABLE.
JUST A FEW YEARS AGO, THESE
SLOPES WERE WHITE, COVERED BY
SNOW AND GLACIAL ICE.
THERE WEREN'T ANY STEEP ROCK
EDGES.
>> ABOVE A CERTAIN HEIGHT, THESE
SLOPES AROUND THE GLACIER ARE
IN PERMAFROST.
AS IT MELTS, WE SEE A LOT OF
DEBRIS ON THE GLACIERS.
YOU SEE IT EVERYWHERE.
THE GLACIER IS COVERED IN
DEBRIS.
THEY ARE WHAT WE CALL THE
DEBRIS FLOWS THAT COME FROM
THE PERMAFROST MELTING.
>> Narrator: PERMAFROST IS
GROUND THAT IS PERMANENTLY
FROZEN IN SUMMER AS
WELL AS WINTER.
MUCH OF WHAT APPEARS OT BE
SOLID ROCK HERE REALLY
CONSISTS OF STONES AND
BOULDERS HELD TOGETHER BY ICE.
AS THE ICE MELTS, ROCK FALLS
OCCUR, MOUNTAINS ARE ERODED,
AND THEY SLIDE INTO THE
VALLEYS.
THE LANDSCAPE CHANGES.
THE DANGER IS GREATEST IN
SUMMER, WHEN THE REGION IS
FULL OF TOURISTS.
WHEN HANS RUDOLF KEUSEN
FLIES OVER THE AREA,
HE'S ESPECIALLY ON THE
LOOKOUT FOR ROCK EDGES,
NEW CRACKS, AND PLACES
WHERE MELT WATER
HAS GATHERED.
FOR IT'S NOT JUST CRUMBLING
ROCK THAT'S A DANGER.
>> THERE USED TO BE A
RESTAURANT HERE, BUT IT
HAD TO BE ABANDONED.
SMALL CRACKS OPENED UP IN THE
GROUND THEN THERE WERE
LANDSLIDES AND THE CRACKS
BECAME DEEP CREVASSES.
PERMAFROST IS ICE INSIDE THE
MOUNTAINS, FROZEN WATER.
IT PROTECTS THE MOUNTAINS
FROM WATER SOAKING IN AND
FROM WEATHERING.
BUT WHEN THE PERMAFROST MELTS,
WATER IS FORMED.
THAT CAN BUILD UP PRESSURE
THAT CAUSES WHOLE SECTIONS OF
ROCK TO BREAK AWAY.
THERE CAN BE ROCK FALLS AND
MUD SLIDES.
THEY'RE CAUSED BY THE
WATER PRESSURE FROM
MELTED PERMAFROST.
>> Narrator: WHEN THE ICE MELTS,
THE GROUND BECOMES SATURATED.
UPPER LAYERS SLIDE, AND THE
SURFACE CRACKS.
MELT WATER CAN'T FLOW AWAY.
WITHOUT THE PERMAFROST TO SEAL
A MOUNTAIN, WATER SOAKS IN.
AS THE CLIMATE CHANGES, THE
MELT WATER FROM THE GLACIERS
AND THE ICE IN THE MOUNTAINS
HAS BECOME A PROBLEM.
AND IT'S UNPRECEDENTED.
HANS RUDOLF KEUSEN
HAS INSTALLED SENSORS AND VIDEO
CAMERAS IN THE MOUNTAINS
AROUND GRINDELWALD.
ONE OF THEM RECORDED DRAMATIC
IMAGES IN 2008.
THERE HAD NEVER BEEN A LAKE
HERE, SUDDENLY, THE WATER FROM
THAWING SNOW ON THE SURFACE
AND MELTING PERMAFROST FROM
INSIDE THE ROCKS ACCUMULATED.
THE LAKE FILLED UP OVER SIX
MONTHS.
AND EMPTIED AGAIN OVERNIGHT
WITHIN MINUTES.
>> OUR EARLY WARNING
SYSTEM WORKS WELL WITH
MEASUREMENTS FROM THE LAKE AND
OBSERVATIONS FROM UP HERE.
THE FLOOD WATERS COULD BECOME
SO MASSIVE THAT ONE WOULDN'T
BE ABLE TO CONTROL THEM IN THE
VALLEYS AND THEY WOULD CAUSE
GREAT DAMAGE.
WE HAVE TO TRY TO PREVENT
THAT.
>> Narrator: HANS RUDOLF
KEUSEN MAPS THE DANGER AREAS,
ISSUES WARNINGS TO MOUNTAIN
HIKERS, AND SOMETIMES,
HAS PATHS AND ROADS CLOSED.
THE JUNGFRAUJOCH OFTEN CALLED
"THE TOP OF EUROPE" IS A MAJOR
TOURIST ATTRACTION IN THE
REGION.
KEUSEN MONITORS
THE DANGER HERE.
THE TEMPERATURE OF THE
ATMOSPHERE HAS BEEN RISING FOR
A CENTURY WITH THE RESULT THAT
THIS SADDLE BETWEEN THE MONCH
AND JUNGFRAU MOUNTAINS IS
THREATENED.
AT PRESENT, IT'S 3,471 METERS
HIGH.
BUT IF THE ICE CONTINUES
MELTING, THAT FIGURE WILL HAVE
TO BE CORRECTED.
THE MOUNTAINS ARE SHRINKING.
KEUSEN PAYS CLOSE ATTENTION TO
ROCK FACES EXPOSED TO THE SUN.
THIS IS WHERE THAWING STARTS
AND THE GREATEST DANGER LIES.
ONE TOURIST TUNNEL IN
THE JUNGFRAUJOCH HAD TO
BE CLOSED.
THE NEW TUNNEL WAS OPENED JUST
A FEW YEARS AGO.
BUT IT'S DAYS ARE ALREADY
NUMBERED.
KEUSEN HAS INSISTED ON SAFETY
NETS AND TOURISTS ARE STILL
ALLOWED IN, FOR THE TIME
BEING.
>> TWO YEARS AGO WE DISCOVERED
THE FIRST CRACKS WITH WATER
PERMEATING AND ICICLES
FORMING.
HANS RUDOLF KEUSEN SAYS THESE
SIGNS ARE TYPICAL.
YOU SEE, NEW CRACKS HERE
LETTING WATER THROUGH.
THAT'S THE MELTING PERMAFROST
AND IT SEEPS RIGHT INTO
THE MOUNTAIN.
THE WARMTH COMES FROM OUTSIDE
FROM THE SUN RAYS ON THE
SOUTH SIDE.
AND THE PERMAFROST THAWS
DEEPER AND DEEPER INSIDE
THE MOUNTAIN.
IF THE ROCK REMAINED FROZEN,
THERE'D BE NO DANGER TO
THE TOURISTS HERE IN COMING
DECADES, BUT THE MELTING ICE
IS CAUSING THE ROCK TO
CRUMBLE.
AT A DEPTH OF 15 METERS,
KEUSEN'S EXTENSOMETERS
SCAN THE MOUNTAIN.
THERE ARE STRING GAUGES THAT
MEASURE DISPLACEMENT WITHIN A
FRACTION OF A MILLIMETER.
THE DATA IS PUBLISHED ONLINE.
IF THE DISPLACEMENTS BECOME
TOO GREAT, HANS RUDOLF KEUSEN
WILL HAVE TO STOP TOURISTS
COMING ON TO THE JUNGFRAUJOCH.
THERE ARE CURRENTLY ABOUT
600,000 VISITORS A YEAR.
THEY TRAVEL UP HERE ON
EUROPE'S HIGHEST RAILWAY TO
VIEW MOUNT JUNGFRAU.
THE PEAK IS OVER 4,000 METERS.
KEUSEN HAS BEEN WORKING HERE
FOR OVER 25 YEARS.
THE GEOLOGICAL DATA HE HAS
COLLECTED IS ALARMING.
THE RAILWAY STATION HAS HAD TO
BE PROPPED UP SEVERAL TIMES.
>> I HAVE DISCOVERED THAT THE
MOUNTAIN IS OPENING UP.
THAT THESE CRACKS ARE WIDENING
ABOUT 1 MILLIMETER A YEAR.
THAT MAY NOT SEEM MUCH, BUT
IT'S A TREND.
WHENEVER TEMPERATURES RISE, IT
OPENS MORE.
IT'S GETTING WORSE.
AND I DON'T SEE ANY INDICATION
THAT IT'S NOW SUDDENLY GOING
TO STOP.
I>> Narrator: T'S IMPORTANT
FOR EUROPE TO HAVE AN EXACT
FORECAST OF WHAT THE FROST
WILL DO WHEN THE GLOBAL
TEMPERATURE RISES.
THE RESEARCHERS FROM THE
ALFRED WEGENER INSTITUTE
AND THEIR RUSSIAN COLLEAGUES
HOPE TO FIND THE CRUCIAL
MISSING PIECES TO
THE PUZZLE HERE IN
EASTERN SIBERIA.
SCIENTISTS ALL OVER THE WORLD
WERE AWAITING THEIR RESULTS
WITH ANTICIPATION.
THE GROUND IS FROZEN HARD IN
WINTER AND THE LAKE AND THE
CRATER IS COVERED IN ICE.
THE SURFACE ONLY THAWS FOR A
FEW WEEKS IN SUMMER.
THEY BEGAN THEIR OBSERVATIONS
ON THE SHORE AT THE LAKE.
THE DEPTH OF THE ICE, IT'S
PROPERTIES, AND WATER QUALITY,
PROVIDE IMPORTANT INFORMATION
ABOUT THE CHANGING SEASONS
HERE IN CHUKOTKA, CLOSE TO THE
ARCTIC OCEAN.
>> THE ICE HERE IS PROBABLY
FORTY CENTIMETERS THICK,
SO WE CAN WALK ON IT.
WE'LL SEE WHAT IT'S LIKE
FURTHER ON.
>> Narrator: THE SCIENTISTS'
SAFETY WAS, OF COURSE,
TOP PRIORITY.
IF ONE OF THEM HAD AN
ACCIDENT, OR THE ICE GAVE WAY,
IT COULD'VE BEEN DAYS BEFORE
HELP ARRIVED.
THE CURRENT QUALITY OF THE
WATER PROVIDED THEM WITH A
REFERENCE VALUE.
LATER, THEY WOULD COMPARE IT
WITH THE WATER THEY EXTRACTED
WHEN DRILLING.
THAT WOULD THROW LIGHT ON THE
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PREVIOUS
AGES AND THE PRESENT.
THEY PLAN TO TAKE SAMPLES FROM
AS DEEP AS 140 METERS.
>> THIS IS JUST FOR THE CHEMICAL
ANALYSIS, BUT IN THE FIRST 20
METERS WE ALSO FIND ALGAE, AND
WE ASSUME THAT BY DRILLING INTO
THE PERMAFROST, WE'LL ALSO FIND
LAKE SEDIMENTS IN WHICH THESE
ALGAE ARE CONSERVED FROM THE
PAST.
AND WHEN WE UNDERSTAND THE
PRESENT SYSTEM, THAT'S WHY
WE'VE TAKEN THIS SAMPLE, WE'LL
BE IN A BETTER POSITION TO SAY
WHAT IT MAY HAVE BEEN LIKE
PREVIOUSLY.
>> Narrator: THEY PLANNED TO
DRILL A 100 METERS FURTHER
ALONG THE SHORE.
THE LEADER OF THE EXPEDITION,
GEORG SCHONBORN, EXAMINED
THE TERRAIN.
>> WHAT'S SPECIAL ABOUT IT IS
THAT A METEORITE HAS CRASHED
INTO THIS ROCK.
IN THE MOMENT OF IMPACT, THE
ROCK MELTED.
IT HAS SINCE CRYSTALLIZED
AGAIN, BUT SO FINE AND SO
BLACK THAT YOU CAN'T RECOGNIZE
ANY OTHER COLORS.
THEY CAN ONLY BE SEEN THROUGH
A MICROSCOPE.
THE BLACK IS THE SOLIDIFIED
MOLTEN MASS THAT OCCURRED
THROUGH THE IMPACT.
THIS STONE IS CALLED
IMPACTITE.
BY DATING IT, WE COULD
ESTABLISH WHEN THE
METEORITE STRUCK.
IT WAS 3.6 MILLION YEARS AGO.
AND SINCE THEN, THERE'S BEEN
THIS POOL WHICH INTERESTS US
SO MUCH.
>> Narrator: THE ICE WAS ONLY
TEN CENTIMETERS THICK.
THE SCIENTISTS DECIDED NOT TO
TAKE THE RISK.
IN A FEW WEEKS, THE LAKE
WOULD'VE FROZEN SO THOROUGHLY
THAT THEY'D BE ABLE TO WALK
OUT TO THE MIDDLE SAFELY.
AT TWO IN THE AFTERNOON, THE
SUN SET.
THE NEXT DAY, THE RIG WOULD BE
SET UP.
IT HAD SNOWED IN THE NIGHT.
>> IT IS A BIG OPERATION FOR
SURE, BECAUSE, YOU KNOW,
ALWAYS DRILLING RELATED TO THE
VERY HARD AND HEAVY TECHNIQUE
AND YOU NEED BIG TRUCKS TO
OPERATE WITH IT.
QUITE A NUMBER OF CREW, QUITE
A NUMBER OF PEOPLE FOR IT, SO
IT TAKES SOME TIME TO TELL THE
MEN WHAT TO DO, REALLY.
IT COSTS ACTUALLY SOME MONEY
SO, WHAT TO DO.
>> Narrator: THE RUSSIAN
DRILLING TEAM BROUGHT THE
HEAVY MACHINERY HERE OVER THE
FROZEN TUNDRA.
IT TOOK WEEKS.
TRACK VEHICLES HAULING THE
EQUIPMENT OVER THE ICE.
APART FROM THE RIG, THEY
HAULED 18 CONTAINERS, ALMOST
1000 TONS OF FUEL, A
LABORATORY, AND A WORKSHOP.
A YEAR PREVIOUSLY, THIS RIG
WAS BEING USED TO DRILL
FOR GOLD.
THAT'S WHERE THE TEN MAN
DRILLING TEAM GAINED
THEIR EXPERIENCE.
>> IT'S AN UNUSUAL JOB.
I'M WORKING FOR SCIENTISTS FOR
THE FIRST TIME.
BUT WE'LL MANAGE.
>> Narrator: THE SCIENTISTS
ESTABLISHED THE POSITION OF
THE RIG USING A SATELLITE
BASED NAVIGATION SYSTEM.
DEEP SNOW MADE THE GOING
TOUGH.
IT TOOK TWO DAYS TO MOVE THE
RIG FROM THE CAMP TO THE
DRILLING POSITION.
IN ADDITION TO THE RIG, A
GENERATOR AND A LABORATORY HAD
TO BE TRANSPORTED TO THE LAKE.
THE GERMAN-RUSSIAN EXPEDITION
TEAM WERE HOPING TO FIND
IMPORTANT EVIDENCE OF CLIMATE
CHANGE.
IN WARM PERIODS, THERE MUST
HAVE BEEN WATER HERE.
IN COLD TIMES, ICE AND DEBRIS.
THE GERMAN SCIENTISTS HAD TO
BE SHOWN HOW THE RIG WORKS.
AT THIS STAGE, THEY ONLY HAD A
VAGUE IDEA OF THE TECHNOLOGY.
>> IT WASN'T ALWAYS CLEAR
IN THE INITIAL DISCUSSIONS
WHAT TECHNOLOGY WOULD BE
USED, BUT WE HAVE HERE A
METHOD THAT FACILITATES VERY
FAST AND VERY CLEAN DRILLING.
IT USES COMPRESSED AIR.
THAT MEANS THE CORE, WHICH WE
WILL LATER HOLD IN OUR HANDS,
WILL BE SO CLEAN THAT
WE'LL BE ABLE TO EXAMINE
IT IMMEDIATELY.
WE WON'T HAVE TO CLEAN IT
FIRST.
THAT'S VERY PROMISING.
WE EXPECT THE CORE TO BE GOOD.
>> Narrator: BY DRILLING
TO A DEPTH OF 100 METERS,
THE SCIENTISTS HOPE TO BRING
THE EVENTS OF MORE THAN A
MILLION YEARS TO LIGHT.
BUT FIRST, THEY'D HAVE TO
SPEND A FEW MORE DAYS TESTING
THEIR EQUIPMENT.
AT NEARLY 3000 METERS,
THE ZUGSPITZE IS GERMANY'S
HIGHEST MOUNTAIN.
THE EFFECTS OF MELTING ICE ON
THE GEOGRAPHY OF CENTRAL
EUROPE ARE MOST NOTICEABLE
HERE.
SOME 3,700 YEARS AGO, 400
MILLION CUBIC METERS OF ROCK
BROKE AWAY FROM THE NORTH FACE
OF THE ZUGSPITZE AND BURIED
EVERYTHING IN THEIR PATH.
SCIENTISTS POINT OUT THAT THE
EARTH WAS EXPERIENCING WARM
TEMPERATURES THEN LIKE THOSE
OF TODAY.
COULD THAT NATURAL DISASTER
REOCCUR?
?
>> Narrator: MIKAEL KARTPLOTTER
AND HIS COLLEAGUES FROM THE
UNIVERSITY OF BONN, ARE TRYING
TO ANSWER THAT QUESTION.
>> ALL WE SEE HERE IS VERY SMALL
INCIDENTS, WE CALL THIS A
TRANSIENT SYSTEM.
THAT MEANS, THE SYSTEM IS
CHANGING AT THIS MOMENT.
AND WE CAN OBSERVE WHAT
PARAMETERS DECIDE IF THEY'LL
BIT OF PERMAFROST OT WHETHER
THE PERMAFROST WILL DISAPPEAR.
IT'S A VERY SENSITIVE SYSTEM
AND THAT'S WHAT'S INTERESTING
FOR US ABOUT THE ZUGSPITZE.
?
>> Narrator: THERE ARE STILL
MANY GLACIERS IN THE MOUNTAINS
AROUND THE ZUGSPITZE, BUT
THEY'VE BEEN MELTING RAPIDLY
IN THE PAST TWENTY YEARS.
IF THEY CONTINUE CONTRACTING
AT THE SAME RATE, THEY'LL HAVE
DISAPPEARED IN ANOTHER TEN.
THAT POSES AN ACUTE THREAT TO
TOURISM, THE INFRASTRUCTURE,
AND THE RESIDENTS OF THE
REGION.
MIKAEL KARTPLOTTER AND HIS
COLLEAGUES MEASURE THE ICE
CONTENT OF THE ROCK.
THE RESISTANCE BETWEEN THE
ELECTRICAL CONTACTS SHOWS THEM
WHEN AND BY HOW MUCH THE
FROZEN CORE RECEDES IN SUMMER
AND GROWS AGAIN IN WINTER.
THEY USE AN OLD TUNNEL THAT
ONCE LINKED TWO SKI AREAS.
THE GEOLOGISTS HAVE SET
THEIR ELECTRODES ALL OVER
THE MOUNTAIN.
EVENTUALLY, THEY HOPE TO
OBTAIN A KIND OF X-RAY IMAGE
OF THE ZUGSPITZE SHOWING
THE FROST WHICH SURVIVES
THE SUMMER.
>> WE'VE MEASURED THE
TEMPERATURES ON THE OUTSIDE,
WE ALSO HAVE TEMPERATURES
SENSORS IN THE TUNNEL ITSELF.
WE CAN MEASURE THE TEMPERATURE
OF THE WALLS, BUT WE DON'T
KNOW HOW WARM IT IS AT A DEPTH
OF 5 OR 10 METERS.
THAT'S WAHT WE WANT TO FIND
OUT.
SO WE'VE EMBEDDED 160
ELECTRODES IN THE ROCK.
WE CAN FEED ELECTRICITY TO ANY
ONE OF THEM AND THEN MEASURE
HOW MUCH OF IT REACHES THE
NEXT ELECTRODE.
THAT WAY, WE CAN SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING INSIDE THE ROCK.
>> Narrator: MIKAEL KARTPLOTTER
REPEATS THE EXPERIMENT AT
VARIOUS TIMES OF THE YEAR.
HE'S ALREADY EXPECTING MASSIVE
LANDSLIDES IN THE NEXT
FEW YEARS.
THE GEOLOGISTS INTENDED TO
INSTALL ON THE ZUGSPITZE THAT
WILL CONTINUOUSLY TRANSMIT
DATA TO THEIR LABORATORY
IN BONN.
AN OLD SIDE TUNNEL LEADS
DIRECTLY INTO THE ROCK FACE.
>> BEHIND ME, IS THE NORTH FACE
OF THE ZUGSPITZE AND THIS IS
ONE OF THE LAST EXAMPLES OF
PERMAFROST IN THE ZUGSPITZE.
THE CORE'S OF THE VERY STEEP
NORTHERN ROCK FACE BEHIND ME,
WHICH LOSES A LOT OF HEAT IN
WINTER.
THAT'S WHY THIS IS ONE OF THE
VERY FEW REMAINING PERMAFROST
AREAS IN THE MOUNTAIN.
>> Narrator: AT AN ELEVATION OF
2,900 METERS, THE SCIENTISTS
EMERGE FROM THE MOUNTAIN
WITH THEIR EQUIPMENT.
BATTERIES, CABLE DRUMS,
TEMPERATURE SENSORS AND
WEATHER PROOF CASINGS.
HERE ON THE SUMMIT THEY INTEND
TO INSTALL THEM ON THIS
ROCK FACE.
EVEN IN WINTER, THE SNOW SOON
MELTS HERE.
SNOW INSULATES THE MOUNTAIN
AND WOULD DISTORT THE RESULTS
THE SCIENTISTS ARE LOOKING
FOR.
KARTPLOTTER AND HIS COLLEAGUES
ARE EXPERIENCED RESEARCHERS,
BUT IN THESE FREEZING
TEMPERATURES, RAIN, AND SNOW,
THEY FACE NEW CHALLENGES.
THE SCIENTISTS EXPERIENCE
PROBLEMS WITH THEIR
SAFETY HOOKS.
THEY WON'T GRIP.
THE ROCK SPLITS AND EVEN ICE
SCREWS WON'T HOLD.
IT'S JUNE AND MOST OF THE ICE
HAS ALREADY MELTED.
THE SCIENTISTS PROCEED WITHOUT
SAFETY HOOKS.
IT'S PRECISELY WHAT THEY'RE
RESEARCHING THAT CREATES
THESE PROBLEMS.
THE MOUNTAIN IS CRUMBLING.
>> WE HADN'T EXPECTED THESE
PROBLEMS, BUT ACTUALLY, WE
SHOULD HAVE.
BECAUSE HERE, WE HAVE
PERMAFROST THAT IS CONTRACTING
AND EXPANDING THROUGHOUT THE
SUMMER AND WINTER.
THE CONTINUOUS FREEZING AND
MELTING TRIGGERS THIS FINE
RUBBLE COMING DOWN THE
MOUNTAIN.
IT'S THE SAME PROBLEM WE'RE
HAVING TO COPE WITH NOW.
WHERE IS A STABLE POINT AT
WHICH WE CAN FASTEN OURSELVES?
>> Narrator: NEVERTHELESS, THEY
SUCCEED.
WITHIN SIGHT OF THE SUMMIT
STATION, THEY INSTALL THE
SENSORS THAT WILL TRANSMIT
DATA OVER THE NEXT FEW YEARS
WHICH WILL TELL MIKAEL
KARTPLOTTER HOW QUICKLY
THE MOUNTAIN ADAPTS TO
THE AMBIENT TEMPERATURE
AND HOW LONG IT CAN
STORE ITS OWN.
BACK AT BONN UNIVERSITY, THEY
SEE IT WORKS.
THE BOXES ON THE ZUGSPITZE ARE
TRANSMITTING THE TEMPERATURES
AT THE ROCK FACE.
NOW, KARTPLOTTER SIMULATES THE
CONDITIONS ON THE ZUGSPITZE IN
HIS LABORATORY.
HE SETS SCREWS INTO A PIECE OF
ROCK WHICH HE HAS BROUGHT BACK
FROM AN ELEVATION OF 2,900
METERS.
THEY ARE ELECTRODES.
WHICH WILL PASS CURRENT
THROUGH THE ROCK WHEN
KARTPLOTTER HAS FROZEN IT.
HE'S ESTABLISHING REFERENCE
VALUES FOR HIS DATA FROM
THE ZUGSPITZE.
WHAT HAPPENS INSIDE THE
MOUNTAIN WHEN THE ICE MELTS
IN SUMMER?
HOW DOES IT EXPAND AGAIN IN
WINTER?
AND WHAT CAN HALT THE THAWING
PROCESS?
AFTER YEARS OF RESEARCH INTO
EUROPEAN PERMAFROST,
KARTPLOTTER HAS SOME INITIAL
ANSWERS TO THOSE QUESTIONS.
HE'S DRAWN GRAPHS OF THE
ACCUMULATED DATA.
THEY SHOW HOW THE FROZEN CORE
OF THE ZUGSPITZE HAS CHANGED
OVER THE YEARS.
THE RESULTS WERE SURPRISING.
>> UNTIL JULY, IT THAWS TO A
DEPTH OF ALMOST 10 METERS.
THEN THE REST OF THE YEAR,
WHEN WE WOULD EXPECT FURTHER
THAWING, IT HARDLY OCCURS.
THAT SURPRISED US.
IT CONTRADICTED OUR PREVIOUS
UNDERSTANDING OF THE
THAWING PROCESS.
BUT IT DOES CORRESPOND WITH
THE FACT THAT WHERE THE
NOTORIOUS ROCK FALLS OCCURRED
IN SWITZERLAND IN 2003, WE SEE
HEAVIER ROCK FALLS IN JUNE AND
JULY.
>> Narrator: HERE, IN THE
SIBERIAN ICE, THE DATA FROM THE
ZUGSPITZE SHOULD BE CONFIRMED.
RUSSIANS JOKE THAT THE WEATHER
AT LAKE EL'GYGYTGYN
IS EITHER BAD OR VERY BAD.
IT SEEMS THE RUSSIAN-GERMAN
TEAM RAN INTO VERY
BAD WEATHER.
THEY HAD TO TEMPORARILY HALT
THEIR WORK.
THEY SPENT THE NEXT FEW DAYS
WORKING IN THE LABORATORY.
THE WATER SAMPLES WHICH THEY
HAD TAKEN FROM THE LAKE
IN BRILLIANT SUNSHINE JUST
A FEW DAYS BEFORE, HAD
TO BE FILTERED.
THEY CONTAINED DIATOM ALGAE,
WHICH THE RESEARCHERS WANTED
TO COMPARE WITH THE SAME
ALGAE IN THEIR SAMPLES FROM
THE BOREHOLE.
THAT COULD PROVIDE USEFUL
INFORMATION ABOUT PREVIOUS
CLIMATE CONDITIONS.
>> WE TAKE THE FILTER WITH
WHAT WE ASSUME ARE DIATOM
ALGAE AND LET IT DRY OUT.
THEN WE'LL TAKE IT HOME TO
ANALYZE IT.
IT MAY NOT LOOK LIKE IT, BUT
THERE ARE 80 LITRES IN THIS
PACK, SO WE HOPE WE'VE CAUGHT
ENOUGH OF THESE ALGAE FOR OUR
RESEARCH PURPOSES.
WE CAN'T BE SURE AT THIS
STAGE, BUT WE'RE OPTIMISTIC.
WHAT'S ALSO INTERESTING IS
THE WATER QUALITY WHICH WE
ALSO MEASURE.
IT IS ALMOST THAT OF DISTILLED
WATER.
IT'S INCREDIBLY PURE.
>> Narrator: THE SCIENTISTS
USED THE BREAK THE STORM HAD
FORCED ON THEM, TO SEND
EMAIL REPORTS VIA THEIR
SATELLITE PHONE.
>> IT'S FRUSTRATING SOMETIMES,
BUT ALL THESE YEARS IT'S
BEEN DIFFICULT.
THIS LAKE IS AT THE BACK OF
THE BEYOND.
THERE WERE AMERICANS WHO SAID
IT WAS LIKE FLYING TO MARS.
IT'S TERRIBLY COMPLICATED TO
WORK HERE.
AND THE TONS OF EQUIPMENT WE
BROUGHT HERE TO GET HOLD OF
GEOLOGICAL SAMPLES IS
ENORMOUS.
IT'S VIRTUALLY COMPARABLE TO A
GREAT SEA EXPEDITION.
YOU HAVE TO REALIZE THAT
YOU'RE NOT IN EUROPE OR IN THE
HIGH-TECH U.S. HERE.
WE LITERALLY HAVE TO BREAK NEW
GROUND.
>> Narrator: THE SNOW STORM
RAGED FOR 5 DAYS.
DRILLING WAS IMPOSSIBLE.
IT WAS SOMETHING OF AN
EXPEDITION JUST TO GO TO
THE LAVATORY.
OR TO EAT.
BUT THE WEATHER DIDN'T DAUNT
LUDMILLA.
SHE WAS THE ONLY WOMAN IN THE
CAMP AND COOKED EVERYONE THREE
HOT MEALS A DAY.
THE MEAT, BREAD, RICE, AND
NOODLES, WERE ALL BROUGHT HERE
BY SNOWCAT SEVERAL WEEKS
BEFORE AND STORED
DEEP FROZEN OUTSIDE.
THE RESEARCHERS RECEIVED A
DAILY WEATHER FORECAST BY
SATELLITE PHONE.
THAT WAY, THEY KNEW THE STORM
WAS FINALLY SUPPOSED TO CLEAR.
THE FOLLOWING MORNING, IT WAS
-30 DEGREES CELSIUS AND THE
SUN ONLY SHONE FOR AN HOUR.
JUST ENOUGH TIME TO CLEAR THE
HALF METER OF NEW SNOW.
>> IT WAS A REAL BLIZZARD.
YOU COULD HARDLY SEE YOUR HAND
IN FRONT OF YOUR FACE.
BUT AT LEAST THE SUN'S COME
THROUGH NOW.
IT'S STILL WINDY, BUT I THINK
THE WEATHER'S CLEARING UP SO
THAT WE CAN DO A BIT MORE AND GO
OUTSIDE.
>> Narrator: FINALLY, THE
DRILLING COULD BEGIN.
THE MEN HAD TO WORK IN 3
SHIFTS, 24 HOURS A DAY IN
ORDER TO REACH A DEPTH OF 100
METERS.
GEORG SCHONBORN AND HIS
COLLEAGUES HAD NO
TIME TO LOSE.
THE DRILL WOULD BORE DEEP INTO
THE FROZEN GROUND TO THE
SEDIMENTS THAT INTEREST THE
RESEARCHERS.
EVERY 2 METERS, THE DRILL WAS
REMOVED AND EMPTIED.
THE FIRST FEW METERS REQUIRED
THE GREATEST CARE.
THE HOLE HAD TO BE EXACTLY
PERPENDICULAR.
IF THE DRILL ENTERED AT AN
ACUTE ANGLE, IT WOULD FALSIFY
THE RESULTS.
>> HE'S EXPLAINED TO ME WHAT
THEY HAVE TO DO.
THEY'LL USE A LARGE DIAMETER
DRILL FOR THE FIRST 2 METERS
AND THEN INSERT A PIPE TO
PROTECT THAT SECTION.
THEN CONTINUE WITH A SMALLER
DRILL, 11 CENTIMETERS, AND
THEN A BIT MORE.
THEY'LL DRILL DEEPER AND THEN
START HAMMERING AND THE CORE
WILL COME OUT.
>> Narrator: THE WORK AT THE RIG
WAS ARDUOUS.
THE MOTORS WERE NOISY, THERE
WAS A STRONG SMELL OF OIL AND
HEATING WAS KEPT LOW SO
THAT THE MACHINES COULD
CONTINUE WORKING.
THE CORE HAD TO BE RETRIEVED
FROZEN AND REMAIN FROZEN
OTHERWISE, THE RESULTS WOULD
BE USELESS.
THE MACHINE BORED INTO THE
GROUND INEXORABLY.
AT THE INITIAL STAGE, IT WAS
POSSIBLE TO MAKE CORRECTIONS.
LATER, ONE PIPE AFTER ANOTHER
WOULD BE INSERTED INTO
THE GROUND.
THE GERMAN SCIENTISTS WERE
KEENLY AWARE OF THEIR
RESPONSIBILITY.
THE EXPEDITION HAD COST ABOUT
A MILLION DOLLARS AND IT WAS A
UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY.
WHILE THEIR COLLEAGUES IN
EUROPE WERE WORKING ON THE
SYMPTOMS OF GLOBAL WARMING,
THEY HAD THE POSSIBILITY HERE
OF FINDING DATA THAT COULD
PROVIDE THE BASIS FOR LONG
TERM FORECASTS.
THERE HAVE BEEN WARMER PERIODS
BEFORE, BUT HUMAN BEINGS WERE
EITHER NOT PRESENT ON THE
EARTH OR FAR LESS PREPARED
FOR THEM.
?
>> Narrator: LATE SUMMER IN THE
RHONE REGION IN EASTERN
GERMANY, AMAZINGLY, THERE IS
ALSO PERMAFROST HERE, AS IN
THE ARCTIC CIRCLE AT
LAKE EL'GYGYTGYN.
THE GEOLOGIST MARTIN GOUDA HAS
BEEN STUDYING THE SOUTHERN
MOST ICE CORES FOR YEARS.
>> YOU SEE BEHIND US THE BAYA, A
TYPICAL RHONE NULL.
THESE BULLS HAVE MANY ROCK
HEAPS AND SOME OF THEM
CONTAIN PERMAFROST.
IT'S A RARE PHENOMENON AT THIS
LOW ELEVATION.
NORMALLY, WE FIND PERMAFROST
ABOVE ABOUT 2,500 METERS
IN THE ALPS.
>> Narrator: EVEN IN SUMMER WHEN
THE TEMPERATURE RISES TO 30
DEGREES CELSIUS, GOUDA ONLY
HAS TO DIG A FEW CENTIMETERS
TO FIND FROZEN GROUND.
FROST THAT HAS BEEN HERE SINCE
THE LAST ICE AGE.
WITHOUT THE FROZEN CORE, THESE
ROCK HEAPS IN EASTERN GERMANY
WOULD NOT HAVE SURVIVED.
THE CORE IS STILL LARGE ENOUGH
TO CONSERVE THIS UNIQUE
LANDSCAPE WITH ITS RARE PLANT
AND ANIMAL LIFE.
THESE ROCK HEAPS OCCUR DUE TO
THE WEATHERING OF LARGE BLOCKS
OF STONE.
THEY ONLY SUPPORT MEAGER
VEGETATION...
EVEN ON THE VERY OLD ROCK
HEAPS.
THAT'S BECAUSE LITTLE SOIL CAN
ACCUMULATE HERE.
YOU ONLY FIND MOSS AND LICHEN.
>> AT THE MOMENT THE
TEMPERATURE IN BETWEEN THE
ROCKS IS 20-21 CELSIUS.
THAT'S QUITE NORMAL FOR A
SHADY SPOT ON A DAY LIKE THIS
IT'S THE SAME TEMPERATURE I
WOULD USUALLY MEASURE AT
TWO METERS.
THAT MEANS, WE HAVE THE SAME
TEMPERATURE HERE, 20
CENTIMETERS UNDERGROUND
AS WE'D FIND IN THE
OPEN ATMOSPHERE.
>> Narrator: THE DIFFERENCE IN
TEMPERATURE BETWEEN THE UPPER
AND LOWER REGIONS OF THE
ROCK HEAP IS DECISIVE FOR
MARTIN GOUDA.
>> HERE WE HAVE TEMPERATURES
THAT DROP NEARLY
5 DEGREES CELSIUS.
4.6 IS THE LOWEST I'VE
MEASURED.
OF COURSE, THAT'S UNUSUALLY
LOW.
IT'S CAUSED BY A FROZEN CORE
BEING FORMED WITHIN THE ROCK
HEAP IN WINTER.
AND NOW, IN SUMMER, THE AIR
FLOWS INTO THE ROCK HEAP FROM
ABOVE AND COLD AIR COMES OUT
HERE AFTER IT HAS BEEN
DRASTICALLY COOLED BY THE
FROZEN CORE.
SO THIS IS GENUINE PERMAFROST.
WITHOUT THIS COOLING PROCESS
OVER THE ICE, THE LOW
TEMPERATURE COULDN'T BE
MAINTAINED FOR SO LONG
IN SUMMER.
?
>> Narrator: THE SCIENTISTS
FROM THE ALFRED WEGENER
INSTITUTE WORKED AT LAKE
EL'GYGYTGYN FOR SIX WEEKS.
TOWARDS THE END OF THEIR STAY,
IT WAS -30 DEGREES CELSIUS AND
THE LAKE WAS FROZEN SOLID.
A SNOWCAT AND A TANKER BROUGHT
FRESH DIESEL.
IT TOOK 3 DAYS.
THE BOREHOLE WAS NOW 100
METERS DEEP.
THE MECHANISM KEPT JAMMING.
THE RUSSIAN DRILLING TEAM
CALLED THIS "FINE TUNING."
THEY USED THEIR HEAVIEST
HAMMER.
IT TOOK SIX HOURS OF DRILLING
TO EXTRACT ONE OF THE CORES
THEY WERE LOOKING FOR.
AND ANOTHER SIX HOURS FOR THE
NEXT ONE.
THAT WAS THE RHYTHM.
FROZEN DUST, ROCK, AND DEBRIS,
EACH OF THESE FRAGMENTS
CONTAINS SEVERAL CENTURIES OF
THE EARTH'S HISTORY.
AND THEY HAVE TO BE KEPT IN
THE RIGHT ORDER.
AS SOON AS A CORE WAS BROUGHT
TO THE SURFACE, IT WAS
IMMEDIATELY SENT TO THE LAB
WHICH WAS THE ONLY CONTAINER
IN THE CAMP WITHOUT INSULATION
OR HEATING.
THE DRILLING DEPTH, THE
COLOR, AND THE ICE CONTENT
WERE RECORDED.
THE RESEARCHERS ALSO NOTED THE
SURFACE TEXTURE AND THE
BRITTLENESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL
STONES.
THESE PROCEDURES AND PHOTOS
ACCOMPANY THE ENTIRE
DRILLING PROCESS.
>> WHAT WE SEE HERE IS THAT
THERE ARE LARGE POCKETS OF
ICE BETWEEN THE
GRAINS OF GRAVEL.
THAT MEANS THE MATERIAL WAS
SATURATED WITH WATER WHEN
IT FROZE.
THE FACT THAT IT'S COARSE,
INDICATES THAT IT MUST'VE BEEN
MOVED RAPIDLY, EITHER BY WATER
OR SIMPLY BY THE SLOPE.
THEN, WHEN IT CAME TO REST,
IT MUST'VE ABSORBED WATER
AND FROZEN.
>> Narrator: THE TANK HAD
TO BE THAWED BEFORE THEY
COULD REACH THE CAP.
THE SHORT DISTANCE FROM THE
LAKE WAS SUFFICIENT TO MAKE
IT FREEZE.
AS THE EXPEDITION DREW TO A
CLOSE, THE DAYS GREW DARKER
AND DARKER.
IT WAS DECEMBER, AND THE
SUN NO LONGER RISES ABOVE
THE MOUNTAINS.
THE NIGHT SHIFT ON THEIR WAY
TO WORK.
THEY DROVE THE 3 KILOMETERS
BETWEEN THE CAMP AND THE
BOREHOLE IN A TRACK VEHICLE.
IT WAS QUICKER AND SAFER.
THE SNOW WAS DEEP AND ANOTHER
SNOW STORM COULD'VE BROKEN AT
ANY TIME.
ON FOOT, THEY COULD'VE EASILY
LOST THEIR SENSE OF DIRECTION.
THE TEMPERATURE HAD DROPPED TO
-30 DEGREES CELSIUS.
IN COLD LIKE THIS, THE HUMAN
BODY SHUTS DOWN.
BLOOD VESSELS IN THE SKIN AND
IN THE EXTREMITIES CONTRACT.
WARM BLOOD ONLY CIRCULATES IN
THE THORAX AND ABDOMEN TO
MAINTAIN THE TEMPERATURE
OF THE VITAL ORGANS AND
THE BRAIN.
THE SEDIMENTS THE DRILL WAS
NOW BRINGING TO THE SURFACE
WERE MANY HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF YEARS OLD.
SECTIONS WITH A LOT OF ICE
ALTERNATING WITH OTHERS
CONTAINING LITTLE ICE SHOWS
THERE WERE PERIODS IN WHICH
THE PERMAFROST DISAPPEARED,
ONLY TO RETURN.
THE PRECISE RHYTHM WILL
PROVIDE INFORMATION ABOUT THE
SPEED OF THESE PROCESSES
AND WHAT WE CAN EXPECT IN
THE FUTURE.
>> IT'S A TREASURE TROVE OF
INFORMATION.
I WOULDN'T SAY IT'S UNIQUE WHO
KNOWS WHAT WILL BE DISCOVERED
IN FUTURE, BUT IT'S CERTAINLY
A HIGHLIGHT WHICH WILL PROVIDE
SCIENTISTS WITH RESEARCH
MATERIAL FOR YEARS.
SIMPLY BRINGING THIS STUFF
TO THE SURFACE IS A
WONDERFUL EXPERIENCE.
BEING PART OF THE EXPEDITION
WITH ALL THIS TECHNOLOGY,
IT'S SPECIAL.
THE MATERIAL WILL BE EXAMINED
IN LABORATORIES WORLDWIDE.
IF WE HAVE A LOT OF LAKE
SEDIMENTS, THEY'LL BE OF
INTEREST TO MORE SCIENTISTS
THAN IF WE JUST HAD
ROCK SAMPLES.
AND THAT'S LIKELY THE CASE.
IT COULD BE 50 SCIENTISTS
WORLDWIDE COMPETING FOR THESE
SAMPLES, BUT FIRST, WE HAVE TO
GET THEM BACK.
>> Narrator: BACK MEANS TO COLD
STORAGE IN BREMERHAVEN.
SEVERAL THOUSAND KILOMETERS
WITHOUT MELTING.
THESE BOXES WITH ALMOST 3 TONS
OF SAMPLES WILL TAKE 3 MONTHS
TO ARRIVE IN GERMANY.
AS THE LAST OF THE VALUABLE
CORES ARE STILL BEING PACKED,
THE HELICOPTER ARRIVED.
AT THE END OF THEIR SIX WEEK
EXPEDITION, THE SCIENTISTS
COULD FINALLY RETURN HOME TO
ANALYZE THEIR SAMPLES AND
PRECISELY RECONSTRUCT THE
HISTORY OF THE LAKE.
THAT SHOULD SHOW THEM HOW
RISING TEMPERATURES EFFECT
THE EARTH.
?
>> Narrator: BUT ONE LAST TASK
REMAINED.
THEY LOWERED A CHAIN WITH
THERMOMETERS INTO THE
BOREHOLE.
THAT WOULD REGISTER HOW MUCH
THE FROST THAWS IN SUMMER
AND HOW QUICKLY IT
RETURNS IN WINTER.
THE WARNING SIGNALS ARE TO BE
SENT TO EUROPE.
>> IF WHAT WE PREDICT COMES
TRUE, IF THE WARMING OCCURS
MAINLY IN THE NORTH, THAT
MEANS THE PERMAFROST WILL
MELT MORE DEEPLY ON THE
SURFACE THAN IT USED TO.
THAT WILL AFFECT ROADS,
BUILDINGS, AND INFRASTRUCTURE.
A WORLDWIDE NETWORK, BUT
ESPECIALLY IN THE NORTHERN
HEMISPHERE, IS OBSERVING
WHAT'S HAPPENING IN THE
VARIOUS REGIONS.
AND WE NOW HAVE ANOTHER POINT
THAT WILL BE INTEGRATED INTO
THAT WORLDWIDE NETWORK.
IT WILL BE MONITORED
CONSTANTLY TO SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN THE CHUKOTKA
REGION IN THE ARCTIC CIRCLE.
>> Narrator: WITH MIXED
FEELINGS, THE GEOLOGISTS
FINALLY BODE FAREWELL TO
THIS INHOSPITABLE AREA OF
NORTH EASTERN RUSSIA.
THE SCIENTISTS FROM THE ALFRED
WEGENER INSTITUTE SEARCHING
FOR THE SECRETS OF LAKE
EL'GYGYTGYN WILL CERTAINLY NOT
BE THE LAST TO COME HERE.
THE LAKE IS A KEY TO
UNDERSTANDING CLIMATE CHANGE.
IN THE END, WE WERE ABLE TO
KEEP TO OUR SCHEDULE, BUT IT
WASN'T EASY.
TRANSPORT HERE IS NOT LIKE IN
CENTRAL EUROPE.
BUT WE WERE FINALLY ABLE TO
EXTRACT WHAT WE WANTED AND WE
ACHIEVED OUR GOAL.
THAT'S WONDERFUL.
A GOOD BEGINNING AND FOR
ALL THOSE WHO FOLLOW US,
AN ENCOURAGEMENT.
?
>> Narrator: THE CONTAINER CAMP
REMAINS IN STANDING FOR THE
USE OF FUTURE EXPEDITIONS TO
THIS UNIQUE LAKE.
THESE SCIENTISTS GLIMPSE INTO
THE EARTH'S MEMORY COULD HELP
SECURE ITS FUTURE.
?